Biographical Introduction of Gurudev R. D. Ranade

Prof. R. D. Ranade was born on 3rd July 1886 at Jamkhandi in Karnataka. His mother was an ardent devotee of God. She brought him up in a pious atmosphere. As a school-going child, he came in contact with Shri Bhausaheb Maharaj Umadikar through his schoolmate Kallu Bhokare. In 1901, the Saint of Umadi imparted him the “Naam” – the Divine name – initiating him on a glorious spiritual journey and a distinguished scholastic career. He stood 2nd  in the Matriculation Examination in 1902 and won the first Jagannath Shankar Sheth Scholarship in Sanskrit. The then Maharaja of Jamkhandi was so delighted that he distributed sweets in the town on the royal elephant.

The scholarship helped him pursue higher education in the renowned Deccan College in Pune. In 1907, he passed B.A. with Mathematics and became a Dakshina Fellow in the college. Subsequently, he taught English in Fergusson College (1911-13) and became a Curator of ancient manuscripts in Deccan College. In 1914, he passed his M.A. in Philosophy with Honours and won the most coveted Chancellor's Gold Medal. In parallel, he progressed on the spiritual path and had notable spiritual experiences even in early days. He was keen “to find intellectual justification” for his spiritual experiences, which prompted him to study both Eastern and Western philosophies. He was a Professor of Philosophy in the Fergusson College, Poona and Willingdon College, Sangli for ten years. At a young age, he suffered from the dreadful serious illness of meningeal tuberculosis. He firmly believed that his spiritual teacher and meditation would remedy his illness.

Prof. Ranade's first monumental work –‘The Constructive Survey of Upanishadic Philosophy’ – published in 1926, brought him international fame. Deeply impressed by this and other writings of Prof. Ranade, Dr. Ganganath Jha, the then Vice-Chancellor of Allahabad University invited him and insisted that he joins the university, which he did in 1927.

From 1927 to 1946, Prof. Ranade served the Allahabad University as the Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy, then as the Dean of the Faculty of Arts and eventually as its Vice-Chancellor. His stay at Allahabad widened his intellectual horizon and enriched his spiritual experience. After retirement in 1946, he was made ‘Emeritus Professor of Philosophy’. In 1947, the University conferred on him the D.Litt. degree, in recognition of his unparalleled intellectual eminence. In 1921, he had a dream-vision which directed him to go to Nimbal, a small Railway Station between Solapur and Bijapur. He built a house there with the intention of settling down. He made Nimbal his permanent place of residence from 1946.

Prof. Ranade was the President of the Indian Philosophical Congress held at Nagpur in 1937. He delivered numerous prestigious lectures, many of which, were subsequently published as books. These include lectures on the Upanishadic Philosophy at Bangalore; on the Bhagavadgita at Nagpur; on Vedanta in Calcutta; on Hindi Mysticism, primarily at Allahabad; and on Karnataka Mysticism, primarily at Dharwad. His great work on ‘Mysticism in Maharashtra’ was published in 1933.

Prof. Ranade’s philosophy embodies the idea of “One God, One World, and One Humanity”. He famously said: “Realise one God. Then alone will you be able to realize One World and One Humanity and not till then. It is only when all humanity comes to recognize the one Spiritual Principle which underlies all things that we can bring about harmony between different creeds, nations and races.”

Prof. Ranade passed away on 6th June 1957, leaving behind a great reputation as scholar, philosopher, mystic and author. His Samadhi is at Nimbal and his old house is converted into ‘Samadhi Mandir’. Nimbal remains a holy ashram and a place of pilgrimage for his followers.

A-Tributes and Remembrances
