85- Prof. Shiva Shankar Roy

Head of the Department of Philosophy at Allahabad University succeeding Shri Gurudev R. D. Ranade

“Pujyapada Gurudev R. D. Ranade’s contribution to Indian Mysticism cannot be overestimated. Besides, he ranks among the highest and most eminent of Indian philosophers of the recent past. As an academician in Philosophy his place is as high as that of Radhakrishnan and Krishnachandra Bhattacharyya.

In the history of Indian Philosophical thought of the Vedantic tradition Gurudev Ranade, in the manner of the great Acharyas of the Vedanta, has commented on the prasthana-trayi: the Upanishads, the Brahmasutras and the Bhagvadgita. His commentaries are not merely erudite appraisals of the doctrines and arguments incorporated in these philosophico-religious texts. Gurudev’s utterances are full of spiritual significance. They rise from the depths of a divinized consciousness- from the inexhaustible reservoir of intuitive experience- a cognitive function, divested of its object-oriented stance and from an awareness conjugate with limitation – free existence, innately self-shining in its effulgent immediacy.

He appeared to me as the very confluence of the human and the divine, full of compassion for the world, yet wholly detached from it. His bodily frame, frail and fragile, looked like the symbol of a transcendent glory and a sign, functioning as a spiritual antenna. Verily could the discerning eye behold in his demeanour the marriage of the numen ineffable and the ratio aeterna. His fast vanishing earthly visage signified his unbroken communion with an Everlasting Presence-knowing which, as the Upanishad tells us, the knower knows all, crosses the river of sorrow, and stands confirmed in immortality. Events connected with the life of Gurudev Ranade have perennial significance. They were for him signs of an Enduring Beyond- the true Destiny of Man. These signs visibly kept him in a state of open-eyed trance. And of this transic vision in which he stood perpetually stationed, he gives vivid glimpses in his writings.”104

“Prof. Ranade, every moment of his life was in a state of contemplation, studded to the cradle of THEORIA of TURIYA- living in the world and yet transcendent to it. The joy we used to get in his company was just a dispersal of his beatific existence in an environment circumscribed by space and time and inhabited by creatures most unlike him- creatures, who had not even a tangential contact with his spiritual existence. He scattered joy whenever he sat or stood; and it was only on very rare occasions that I saw him angry, sad or morose. His anger if there ever used to be one, was the expression of his disappointment with his own self. His sadness and sorrowful moods only reflected a sense of estrangement with himself.

In November 1941, I went to see him just after the morning sitting of the Music conference had concluded. He asked me about the songs and the performance I liked, and I told him that Pt. Onkar Nath Thakur’s ‘जोगी मत जा’ appealed to me the most. Uttering these words sent a thrill, yhrough his entire being and I could see his eyes assuming a half-open, half-shut mystical appearance. I generally wanted to see his eyes like that, and for all I know, there could hardly be anything more beautiful and expressive in the world than those two eyes, which concealed beneath their dreaming transparency a universe transfused in his Deva, a world submerged in his Narayana- a being lost in the scintillating Dawn of Atmanic awakening.”105

104- V. C. Kelkar: Autobiography of Gurudev Ranade, A Discovery (1980) Pg. viii

105- Prof. S. S. Roy’s speech at Adhyatma Parishad, Allahabad on 22 September 1963
