# A Vindication of Indian Philosophy

No one who has taken the trouble to observe the course of events and opinions in India during the last six or seven years, can have failed to notice that there have been two opposite, almost antagonistic, streams of thought in what might be called New India itself: one, the spiritual, the other, the materialistic; the first bordering on the superstitious; the other culminating in intellectual nihilism. There are healthy elements in both these activities: but the superstructure in either case has been most inartistically raised. If a true temple to "national activity" is to be reared, we must demolish the uncouth structures, and raise out of their materials a building, both artistic and solid, calculated to attract the attention of our contemporaries by its artistic skill, and to go down to posterity on account of its long-enduring elements.

We propose in this article to restrict our attention to the latter part of the scheme—the exposition of the defeats in the materialistic construction of Indian activities. From times immemorial, in this ancient land of ours, there have not been wanting men, who have poured out all their vehemence on the philosophical and spiritual activities of India. Brihaspati, the founder of the Charvaka school, made it a point to attack everything in Indian philosophy and practice, equally whether it was good or bad. And we owe a debt of gratitude to him, since he showed us where our defects lay. He showed us the absurdity of counting the forms of religion as everything, and the spirit as nothing. The great Buddha showed us the vulnerable points of our sacri-

ficial system, and it was owing to him that our sacrifices became more humane. In modern times also, a wave of materialism is spreading side by side with the wave of spirituality, and if we want our spiritual activity to be really healthy, we must learn its defects from the avowed materialists. And because we are unable to do justice to the writings of all such in the course of a short article, we may select Mr. Har Dayal as a typical instance of men who have rebelled against spiritual activities.

And when I say "rebelled", I use the word intentionally. I would request my readers first to go over Prof. Har Dayal's Article on the 'Wealth of the Nation' in the July (1912) number of the Modern Review; and then to compare the sentiments expressed in that article with those expressed in the July (1911) number of the same magazine in an article on "India in America"; and then also to read the article on "Indian Philosophy and Art in the West" by the same writer in the same magazine of April 1912. It would really be a great lesson to the readers of these articles to observe how a man can entirely change round within the course of twelve short months! The Har Dayal of July 1912 seems to be scarcely the Har Dayal of July 1911! I propose briefly to analyse his psychological development and then to make such remarks of my own as would show what I feel about the subject.

And I would scarcely have undertaken the project, if Mr. Har Dayal had been a reviler like other revilers of the Upanishads and Indian spirituality. The very fact that he is quite unlike them prompts me to break a lance with the American professor. He has travelled far and wide, and has tasted of the intoxicating drink of

Western Civilisation. He has been all over Europe, he has been in America, and has observed their various institutions. He therefore speaks from personal experience and actual contact. In his own words, "he has seen the silver lining," which is not visible to so many of us, who are spending their lives in India. In the second place, he has a wonderful command over English prose: he seems to be a master of antithesis, and like all other masters of antithesis, he often contradicts himself. Thirdly, he is a man deeply read in English and also in Indian philosophy: and he knows the merits and defects of either. Fourthly, because he holds with me that the enduring wealth of a nation consists "in the intellect and the character of its men and women," and no other economist would allow this. Fifthly, because his writings are read all over India by the rising generation with extreme avidity: and I do not consider that the sentiments he has expressed in his article on the "Wealth of the Nation" should be allowed to fall in the hands of the youth of India, without at the same time giving an equal opportunity to an opposite opinion to meet the very readers, upon whose minds his articles have made a deep impression. And lastly, because the souls of the ancient seers of India, whom he has treated with scant courtesy, and indeed has not failed to attack without provocation, call upon a young Indian, who knows what to prize most in their teachings, to take up their cause and fight for honour, if not also for duty.

In the latest issue of the Modern Review of August, 1912, I see a note by Mr. H. V. Divatia, who quarrels with Prof. Har Dayal, simply because he has condemned all philosophy and all metaphysics, which he does not want him to do. But is there no champion of

Indian philosophy forth-coming? Is there none to convince Mr. Har Dayal that there are points in Indian Philosophy, which are of perennial interest, and which will sway the minds of all thinkers in all ages and countries? And reader, will you believe me if I say that such a champion is Mr. Har Dayal Himself? Har Dayal against Har Dayal—a sight for the Gods to look on!

Let us see what the writer says in different issues of the Modern Review, first on 'philosophy' itself. In the July number of 1912, he has spared no word in his vocabulary to denounce Indian Philosophy. The "barren metaphysics" of India has "elevated sophistry to the rank of an art"! Indian Philosophy is nothing but "fantastic word towers for solid piles of thought-masonry. India is playing with the toys of childhood in mature ago." He speaks of the intolerable twaddle of the Shastras, and denounces contemptuously the so-called "ineffable joys of trance or Samadhi". He plays with the text of the Upanishads "that by knowing which everything is known," like a child playing with fire. He supposes that the Upanishads are a bundle of "absurd conceits, quaint fancies, chaotic speculations;" and that a liking for them, which scholars like Paul Deussen conceive, is nothing but a "mania for what is effete and antiquated." He compares the six systems of philosophy, which Max Muller unfortunately chose as prominent and not the only ones, to a desert, and the Vedas to the Dead Sea!

We might retort to all this with the very epithet which he has bestowed on the Upanishads,—"verbal jugglery." For let us see what the same writer says elsewhere: "Now of all the treasures of Hindu history,

one of the most precious is our philosophy," (p. 420: April, 1912). Is that really so! "All European scholars know that India is rich in metaphysics." "India can lay Europe under a deep debt of gratitude by introducing her philosophy as a subject of study in Western Universities" (p. 421: April, 1912). "Our philosophy deservedly ranks very high in the estimation of thinkers... Our philosophy takes the Western mind captive on account of its variety, its boldness, its thoroughness, and its clearness." (p. 422: April, 1912). Can anything be more conclusive proof of how even great men can turn black into white! But let us proceed further. "I see that those old thinkers perhaps exhausted the possibilities of human thought in the field of pure metaphysics" (p. 422: April, 1912). ["India can offer to the world two things, which are sufficient to pay for everything that she receives—her systems of philosophy, and her ideal of a religious life ..... Wisdom and Virtue in exchange for the secrets of manufacture and mechanical science—it is too generous an offer!"] (p. 11: July, 1911). But reader, these are his opinions of July 1911, and not of July 1912! Can you conceive of a more thorough-going change?

I might multiply instances: but I fear I might thereby tire out the patience of the reader. I suppose I have shown how the writer has abnormally developed in his contempt of Indian Philosophy on account, perhaps, of his American influence. I could understand a man who asserted that Indian Philosophy was not worth studying at all; but I cannot understand a person who, in one breath, raises it to the skies, and in another consigns it to perdition,—and all this perhaps to secure antithesis and beauty of language, but at the pitiable sacrifice of truth. Who would deny that there is

wordiness in our philosophy! But who would say that there is none in any of the European philosophers? A student of comparative philosophy must know that philosophy can always reach a certain limit—thus far and no further: Just consider a philosopher, whom Mr. Har Dayal asks us to study, who says that “if there is no god, it would be necessary to invent him”, and a poor peasant, an illiterate, uncouth, rustic fellow, of the type of those peasants whom Christ, for example, preached to, who in the innocence of his ignorance, and in the strength of his faith, supposes and knows that God exists. How many of the so-called European ‘philosophers’, pray, had realised God, supposing that such realisation is possible; and if they had not, and if they spoke merely from intellectual conceptions, how very inferior must they be to a poor Niccdemus, or to poor Chokha Mela, who, in the degradation of his caste, yet held communion with God? But I fear we are treading sacred ground, and no quarrel can be possible on this stand-point with our American Professor.

I agree with him in so far that he considers much of our Indian philosophy to be wordy: but I also hold that all philosophy is wordy. What can a layman make of the ‘substance’, ‘attributes’, ‘modes’ of Spinoza’s philosophy? What is Hegel’s philosophy to a non-philosopher but an array of words? There were people, who, before the time of Har Dayal, have called philosophy by the very name with which he chooses to call it: a mere net-work of words, a great desert! Again, the form which has been given to our philosophical treatises by the introduction of imaginary objections and feigned answers, exactly corresponds to the form of the mediaeval philosophy of the schoolmen: the same

imaginary objections, the same subtlety of argument, the same cobwebs of discussion. But when this is said, let the enemy make the best of it. In and behind these tiresome discussions, there is a pith and a marrow which is the heart of philosophy. It is this inner pith which must find expression in different forms, according to the times for which it is meant. Thus it would be most uncharitable to condemn Indian philosophy, as it would be equally uncharitable to condemn the schoolmen. The forms in which they are expressed are forced upon them according to the necessity of the times. It is always upon the past that we must build up the present, and those who despise their ancestors will themselves be despised by their posterity. "We speak of the errors of the past", says James Anthony Froude: "We, with this glorious present which is opening on us, we shall never enter on it till we have learnt to see in that past not error but instalment of truth, hard-fought-for truth, wrung out with painful and heroic effort. The promised land is smiling before us, but we may not pass over into the possession of it, while the bones of our fathers, who laboured through the wilderness, lie bleaching on the sands, or a prey to unclean birds. We must gather relics, and bury them, and sum up their labours, and inscribe the record of their actions on their tombs as an honourable epitaph".

I would take the liberty of impressing the truth of this most deserving passage on the attention of the writer. And yet, for considerations not of prudence but of justice, I may bring home to his mind the great truth which has been evolved through the entire course of the Upanishads, which he hastily calls "absurd con-

ceits, quaint fancies, chaotic speculations". Much sooner, and with greater justice, may we call the Greek Philosophers a set of fools, because they explained the Universe on the theories of Fire, Air, Water, or Earth. It is on account of the very fact that the Rishis differed from one another in their speculations, and also formed some conceptions about the origin of the Universe, which were certainly better than none, that they deserve the respect and attention of every dispassionate thinker, who does not judge of the past times by the canons of the present, and who sees the thread of an evolving idea through the entire course of the so-called "chaotic speculations". To quote J. A. Froude again: "Ptolemy was not perfect, but Newton had been a fool if he had scoffed at Ptolemy. Newton could not have been without Ptolemy; nor Ptolemy without the Chaldees". And however different might be the ideas of the Rishis themselves, yet they gradually evolved out of their speculations this great truth of truths: that there is an Atman, and that He can be realised: that this Atman is God: that the Universe, like the human body, is a covering of this Atman, and is, in fact, the Atman himself.

Upon this great truth stands or falls the whole philosophy of India. However different might be the different moulds in which this great truth is put, this is the great motor idea of all orthodox Indian philosophy. There might be systems which, like Buddhism, maintain the theory of No-Soul. When Ananda asks the Buddha what was meant by the phrase "the world is empty". Buddha answers "that it is empty, Ananda, of a self, or of anything of the nature of a self" (See Mrs. Rhys Davids' Buddhism, Home University Library, p. 52).

I agree with Mr. Har Dayal when he maintains that in a discussion of Indian systems of philosophy, we must include all those 16 systems of philosophy which are given in the Sarva Darsana Samgraha, and even more, and not the Six systems only as Max Muller has done. I suppose that the time is coming when, as anticipated by the late Max Muller, a new class of Sanskrit scholars is coming into being, who, after their study of European philosophy, are devoting their attention to their own native systems in order to place Sankara or Ramanuja or Kapila by the side of the great philosophers of Ancient and Modern Europe. It is time that Sanskrit should come to be known to European Scholars on account of its rich treasures of philosophy, than merely by its philological, antiquarian, or anthropological interest. It is time that the resemblances between Neo-Platonism and Yoga, between the philosophies of Spinoza and Berkeley and Sankaracharya, between Kant's idea of Duty and that of the Bhagavadgita, between the claims of both Tukaram and the Christ as their being the Sons or the Deputies of God, or even God himself, and other similar problems should be brought to light and discussed. It is only when, as I said, the pith of our philosophy is exhibited in modern garb that the world will come to know of the worth of Indian philosophy. Then, and not till then, will critics like Mr. Har Dayal see the intrinsic worth of a seemingly lifeless, soul-less philosophy.

So much with regard to purely philosophical matters. Coming, more or less, to persons, who were the main cause of the spread of Indian ideas in America, I mean, Vivekananda and Ramatirtha, and one far greater than either of them, Ramkrishna Paramahansa, the veiled

attacks which Mr. Har Dayal has made against all three, mentioning everything about them except their names, will be apparent on the first reading to every one who has made even a partial study of the movement they set on foot. The attacks which he has made in the number of July 1912 are wonderful, because they are veiled; but still more wonderful is the way in which he has, in former issues, stated the very opposite of them. "Contemplation in isolation," says the writer in July 1912, "is one favourite method of spending time adopted by India's sons.....They fall into the vacuous abyss of contemplation and inaction. They have established monasteries in remote nooks in the mountains in order to realise the Brahman. They practise all sorts of mysterious postures and other funny devices of a crude mysticism. All their stock and store consists in the Vedanta Sutras, the Upanishads, and the sonorous monosyllable Om. This last word seems to do duty for all history and science. Whenever a saint has nothing to think about, he takes refuge in Om.....How strange it is that a capacity for swooning away should be considered the mark of wisdom! It is very easy to lose consciousness if one has strong emotions, and a feeble intellect! That is why ladies faint so often on the slightest provocation.....No wonder that books and laboratories are despised, for no knowledge is needed to make one swoon away at intervals." This is the most suggestive passage that ever was penned. He refers to the Mayavati-Ashram, to Vivekananda, to Ramtirtha, with whom "Om" seemed to do duty for all Science, and to Ramkrishna Paramahansa, who is reported by M., his disciple, to have swooned away at frequent intervals. The whole army of modern saints have been brought to the guillotine!

As I said, let us turn to the author's former writings and see how very glaring are contradictions of which he is guilty. He contemptuously refers in the above passage to the contemplation in isolation, which brings on inaction. But here is what he said in the issue of July 1911: Wherever he wandered in the continent of Europe, "I have always turned towards the dream of my love, that sacred tapovan and cradle of Hindu spirituality, where all Hindu aspirants from Kapila to Swami Ramtirtha, have gone to get wisdom and insight by communing with Nature and their own hearts—a veritable training ground for the spiritual grants of India; but here in the West, it is all noise and show and conventionality." Forsooth, he longs for the solitude of the 'tapovan' then! He admits that in solitude, one can commune with Nature and one's heart! He admits that Ramtirtha repaired to the Himalayas to gather virtue! He admits in the words of Milton that solitude is the nurse of Virtue, where Virtue plumes her feathers which were "all-too ruffled in the bustle of active life"! Yet another extract! "As well tame a tiger or bind the wind as get an American to retire to the mountains for meditation! He cannot understand that the hidden sources of all true life lie far away from the Senate, the market-place, the theatre, the stock-exchange and the Church." (July 1911). We may, therefore, be justified in throwing back upon this Shylock, false contradicting, overassuming wrangler the very words which he threw at the innocent Bassanios "These be thy gods, Oh Israel!"

Let us, moreover, look to other passages in the issue of July, 1911, wherein he is voluntarily praising Vivekananda and Ramkrishna and Ramtirtha, whom he

is condemning in the issue of July, 1912: The beneficial effects of his (i. e. Vivekananda's) preaching are visible on every side, America is always on the alert for a lesson in religion from a Hindu" (p. 6. July, 1911). Again, he respectfully makes mention of "full-size portraits of Paramhansa Ramkrishna and Swami Vivekananda, executed by loving American disciples" (p. 7, July 1911). And last and the most positive: "Ramtirtha was the greatest Hindu who ever came to America, a real saint and sage, whose life mirrored the highest principles of Hindu spirituality, as his soul reflected the love of the "Universal Spirit", whom he tried to realise" (p. 9. July, 1911).

What would readers say of this writer, who blows hot and cold with the same breath? Did he ever form beforehand an accurate conception of what he was going to say? If he has 'evolved', it is a terrible evolution indeed! At any rate, he is an object-lesson in abnormal psychological development, which, in this case, has taken place at an almost electric speed!

Two more points to be cleared up before we finish the review of Prof. Har Dayal's articles. He talks about the "Yoga-craze" and the "Bhakti-mania" as being the powerful sources of the wastage of moral power in India. What does he mean by the Yoga? If he means by the term Yoga "Hatha-Yoga" as it is ordinarily understood I agree with him. But if he means by the Yoga the Yoga as it is taught in the Bhagavadgita, Yoga and Bhakti, Philosophy and Religion, Karma and Jnana are so intensely connected with each other, that by separating the one from the other, you make both impotent. I dissent from Prof. Har Dayal and the late

Mr. Max Muller when they say that philosophy and religion must be rigidly excluded from each other. [I believe that philosophy without religion is like form without spirit : and that religion without philosophy is like spirit which cannot work without a form. It is in the supreme combination of form and spirit, of philosophy and religion, that the true salvation of a nation consists. 'Similarly with regard to Yoga and Bhakti : Yoga is the form, Bhakti is the spirit.] For, says Lord Sri Krishna :—

"Of all the Yogins, I suppose he is the most intent upon me, who, with his heart fixed on me, worships me with faith". [Yoga, in my opinion, may be defined according to its derivation as a positive, persistent and final determination to seek out the truth] of whatever kind it may be. Such a determination necessarily requires solitude in the initial stages, in order that the virtues necessary for an active life may be gathered in the secrets of retirement. Such [a solitude is the fountain-head of energy and strength, virtue and joy. Activity to be productive, must be fed by retired thought.] The history of all religions confirms it. The great Buddha retired to solitude, and it was in solitude that he received his illumination. The Lord to escape company. The late Mikado of Japan was a proverbial recluse; and yet, wonders the Times of India, he was the backbone of all the activities of his nation. Solitude is not, as Prof. Har Dayal says, meant for inaction : on the contrary, it is the nurse of supreme action. The true Yoga must admittedly be the Yoga of service : the Karma-yoga : but the human faculties require to be fed in solitude, and in a transcendental and most fruitful 'inaction' ! "As oft as I have been among men," says Seneca, "I

returned home less a man than I was before". And in order that this should not be the case, one must needs have recourse to solitude and contemplation.

Moreover, is it not wonderful to find how people come to opposite conclusions from the same premises? We find Mr. Har Dayal condemning the people of India, because their Vedanta leads them to inaction. "They become altogether useless for any purpose that one may appreciate". Contrast with this the remarks of another hot-headed, hasty, generaliser—I mean Mr. Ramsay Macdonald: "It (i. e., the Gita) is the gospel of action, of action stern and terrible done by the body and the passions, whilst the possessing soul is at rest in the presence of the eternal.....Bathed in this ocean of self-surrender, and ever filled with the music of the Divine Voice, the Indian's heart beats with ecstasy, and then goes forth to do his work. There is nolimb of the vernacular press.....so dangerous, so seditious, as the song of the blessed one" (The Awakening of India: Popular Edition: p. 120). Can anything be more absurd, more glaring, more misconceived than these hasty, immature remarks of a raw labourite? Yet, as Aristotle says, the truth lies between the two extremes and I would recommend Prof. Har Dayal as well as Mr. Ramsay Macdonald to read the remarks of his adversary in order to become more level-headed, and more like a man! Let them not father their own ideas upon the text which they see!

I now come to another important discussion: Mr. Har Dayal's contemptuous treatment of the Bhaktas. "For one Chaitanya", says he, "it (i. e. Bhakti) gives us a thousand sentimental, weak-minded irresolute devotees, who are good for nothing in any practical

work for righteousness.....It gives them a factitious object of devotion instead of teaching them that every suffering child is Krishna, and every sorrowful brother-man is Rama. They worship the stars and suns, but they forget their brother-man....try to think and look in words : others try to weep and dance. And all the while, ignorance, poverty and disease march triumphant through the land". Yet another extract : "Teach the people that the old gods are dead. What is there at Benares but hideous temples, fat bulls and fat priests? What is there at Puri but Cholera and waves idly breaking on the beach?" Now, pray, why does he wax so eloquent? What level-headed man would believe that god is only in Benares and nowhere else? Have not saints like Tukaram said centuries ago

"wherever you go, you find stones and water : but god is with good";

"verily, verily, the good people are the gods : the images are a mere pretext?"

"Where, then, was the necessity of such an eloquent discourse from Prof. Har Dayal? People have known even before the times of this writer where god was to be found. When he talks of the "funny devices of a crude mysticism" and the uselessness of pilgrimage, he is, like Ixion, merely embracing clouds : hence, the dire brood of his centaur-like ideas, fitting in our midst.

"For one Chaitanya," he admits, we have a host of irresolute devotees. But, reader, mark the words for one Chaitanya. He does acknowledge that Chaitanya was a great man! But when has history shown that great men have sprung up in myriads? A great man arises

out of countless mediocrities, and so is the case even here. When there is a Chaitanya or a Tukaram, a Sankara or a Christ, thousands of inferior persons must prepare the ground for him! Again, he asks us to love every suffering child as Krishna, and every sorrowful brotherman as Rama! Has he not borrowed this expression from Ramtritha whom he himself condemns; for does not Ramtritha talk of the "Starving Narayanas"? Moreover, would we ever deny that Bhakti includes the "love of humanity"? Does not Tukaram implore God to lead him through the service of his feet to the service of mankind?

"Give me the service of Thy feet and the worship of humanity, irrespective of the pride of caste or colour."

Moreover, is it not wonderful to find that this same writer should have admitted that "Voltaire, Rousseau, Marx (the modern Rishi!); Darwin, Lavoisier, Cuvier, Laplace, and Caxton were not personally as noble and pure as St. Bernard, St. Francis, St. Xavier"? (p. 49 July 1912). If personal purity does count for anything, and if social regeneration must come through personal development, then the philosophers he idolises were certainly below the mark! Moreover, is it not an irony of fortune that the same writer who condemns the pilgrimages, and the Ganges, should himself fall a victim to the popular idea: "Time, the mighty architect, the healer of all wounds, and the avenger of all wrongs, will lead our efforts to final success after our ashes are mingled with the eternal waters of the holy Ganga" (p. 11, July 1911). He considers the Ganges as holy, then! and its waters as eternal! Can anything be more superstitious? Yet, these are the weaknesses of great minds!

But I will not merely construe texts: I must say what I feel on the point on my own account. I believe that Bhakti does not consist in religious ceremonials, in pilgrimages, and in formal idol-worships: it consists in love to God, and through this, in love to man. We can never love man so well as when we know that he partakes of the same divine nature which is in us. [Love to humanity must be based on Love to God: if it is not, it is bound to have a shaky foundation. It is the Love which we bear to God that inspires us with Love to man: and those who love man otherwise love him accidentally and not essentially.] People like Har Dayal might indulge in literary studies in such a way as to stunt their moral powers: God may seem distant and far away. Perhaps also they might be sinless, and might not have a new desire for righteousness! But all men who have sinned—and let he, who is sinless, contradict this—and those who have come to have an earnest desire for righteousness, wish from the bottom of their hearts to come nearer God. So too can a sense of eternity, the pangs of sorrow, the bitings of conscience, the vanity of human wishes or a keen social enthusiasm bring man nearer God. It is in such a state of mind that he begins to love God as his only guide and helper, and it is in such a state that the whole moral world opens up before him. If he does not care for the vanities of the world, he might be excused: he cares for the immense gains of moral life. Those critics, therefore, who would assault an innocent Bhakta, must not shut their eyes to this all-important side of man's activities—moral development. It is no use carping at a man simply because he has chosen to devote himself to moral advancement, which, he considers, must necessarily come through a love to God. It is here that personal purity matters a great

deal: and it is here that the philosophers, like those whom Har Dayal has mentioned, are weighed in the balance and found wanting!

We have hitherto expressed our opinions on the manner in which Prof. Har Dayal has inveighed against Indian philosophy, Yoga, and Bhakti, and have, we believe, tried to show that there is another side to the question. Indeed, I must not be supposed to hold that India must be flooded with philosophers, Yogis, and Bhaktas: far from it. Prof. Har Dayal, on the other hand, wants to fill our nation with scientists and economists. "To the preacher", says Prof. Har Dayal in another place, "the world is full of sinners! to the cobbler, it is full of shoes": we might add in a similar style that to Prof. Har Dayal, it is full of 'economists'. I am a firm believer in the manifold activities of a nation, supplementing, instead of contradicting one another. I hold that when a nation rises, it rises from all points of view. The history of England at the time of Elizabeth, or the history of Maharashtra at the time of Shivaji, amply bears out the fact that when a nation rises, it attempts all enterprises. We must have scientists as well as philosophers; men who go in for action, and men who sit down to contemplate; people who devote themselves to social regeneration as well as those who care for personal development. As Prof. Har Dayal has himself said elsewhere: "I need not impose my dream on all. Moral energy takes myriad forms in its manifestation ..... You may as well find fault with the rose for not being a violet, or quarrel with the cuckoo, because she is not a nightingale. Art, Literature, Science, Politics, War, Exploration, Religion—each one of these appeals to some one, and he begins to love it with his

whole heart and soul. Let us not be narrow and one-sided in our judgments" (p. 10, July 1911). If he had just remembered this when he penned his article of July 1912, I would not have felt it necessary to make this long vindication.

And then, it is also wonderful to find—it is perhaps a sign of the times—that while scientists like Sir Oliver Lodge are speaking in favour of religion, philosophers like Prof. Har Dayal should have felt it necessary to take a brief for science and economics. I am not one of those who would condemn science for the sake of religion. I hold that there is a perfect reconciliation between the discoveries of science and the truths of religion. Science merely deals with the works of God. It supplements, instead of supplanting, religion. But I would not have the mere scientific or the mere economic spirit prevail. Let not an age of pure scientists, pure economists and pure calculators prevail and let not the glory of India be extinguished for ever. Religion asks from you merely the consent of the heart, a mere touch of the love of God. I do not understand how this can come in the way of pure activity. It would, as I said, serve only to strengthen activity, and not to weaken it. This is the only secure platform upon which the building of India's activities can be raised. Take it away, and the building will tumble down in no time. Substitute another foundation, and you will find that the building will be raised on mere stubble. We do not want India to imitate either France or America; France, with its falling birth-rate, its frivolous immoral capital, its denuded farms and dying commerce; America, sordid and soul-less, immersed in money-making, a slave of Mammon, and forced to mimic the culture of the very

country against which it revolted. And yet if Mr. Har Dayal has his way, his ideas of liberty, equality, and fraternity would lead merely to national death. The French Revolution which he glorifies—is not this Revolution responsible for modern Anarchism and Nihilism? It is time that India should cease to be polluted by merely the worse elements of Western civilisation. Does not Prof. Har Dayal himself pathetically describe the lot of the woman in the West? Has not the suffragette movement served simply to make men of European women, by taking away all their elegant graces and social virtues? Does it not seem that "almost a new sex is on the make like the feminine neuter of Ants and Bees—not adapted for childbearing" and yet with a pretended power for social service? And what is it due to but to the spirit of "liberty, social equality, rationalism, and fraternity" which he glorifies? (p. 46, July 1912). If India must rise, she will rise in a most peculiar way, not hitherto known to all History. She will combine the virtues of the West and the East, and will rise superior to both. If the West and the East are to meet, they will meet in India, and not in Europe. What a glorious prospect lies before India! I see India flinging away superstition, sloth and intellectual inertia. I see her taking up the scientific spirit, and the energy of Europe. I see her assimilating the excellences of both the East and the West, and rising in the scale of modern nations, preserving all the while the integrity and the pristine purity of her spiritual self!
