---
work_id: vedant
author: gurudev_ranade
work_type: book
language: en
title_en: "Vedant"
sources:
  - Vedant.docx
extracted_via: "pandoc 2.10 (docx → markdown_strict)"
extracted_on: 2026-06-13
---

CHAPTER I

THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM

A philosophy, if it is to be followed, must be flawless in all its aspects. There may be one which has reached the giddy heights of speculation in metaphysics, but lacks the moral fervour, or the psychological insight, or the spiritual enlightenment. Another may be very strong in putting forth the moral standard of conduct, but weak in metaphysics. A third may be spiritual, but apologetic and non-logical in character. The epistemology of one may be in direct conflict with its metaphysics. The Vedanta philosophy which we are trying to present in the following pages will be, so to say, a joint communique of the philosopher and the mystic. With God realisation as the be-all and end-all of human endeavour and as the central theme of Vedanta, we shall find in the sequel that all the problems of philosophy fall in their proper order.

Let us begin with the cosmological problem. It is natural that man becomes aware of the cosmos first and becomes aware of himself afterwards, though after a philosophical evaluation of both the cosmos and himself, he may put himself first and the cosmos afterwards. The world outside us is the first cause of wonder, and the first motive for philosophising. It attracts and bewilders man in various ways and sets him on the path of inquiry to find out the cause, the, source and the evolution of the cosmos including himself. So far as the cosmological problem is concerned, we shall deal not so much with the theory of causation as such, as with the manner or mode of the evolution of the cosmos, as also with the nature and the capability of the causes accepted by Vedanta and some other systems of Indian philosophy. We have different accounts or explanations of how different causes in different systems have been recognised as being responsible for the evolution of the cosmos. We shall first deal with four such accounts, viz., those of the Samkhya, the Vaiseşika, the Bauddha and the Jaina systems and show how all of them are inadequate in comparison with the fifth account, viz., the account given by Vedanta.

(a) The Samkhya Conception of Prakrti: Relation of Prakrti

to Gunas. It is our first task to show in this chapter the inadequacies of the Samkhya philosophy so far as the cosmological account of Prakrti

V-1

VEDANTA-THE CULMINATION OF INDIAN THOUGHT

as being the sole cause of the world is concerned. It is neither possible nor necessary to give here a complete statement of the Samkhya view of the evolution of the world. The Samkhya system believes that the cause of this universe is Prakrti or Pradhana, on account of its being the uncaused prius of all. It is also known as Avyakta on account of its being extremely subtle and imperceptible, and is, therefore, only capable of being inferred from its effects. It is co-eternal with Parusa, though unlike the latter, it is Jada (material) and ever-active. It is just the unity of the three Gunas which are as imperceptible and supersensuous as Prakrti itself. The are as Simkhyas give three main arguments, all of them varieties of the cosmological argument, for the existence of Prakrti. As mentioned in Samkhya-karika they are: from the finite to the infinite, from the effect to the cause and from plurality to unity. The Gunas and everything that follows from them are subservient to Purusa in attaining the two-fold ends of life, viz., enjoyment and liberation. In carrying out this function, the Gunas, though different from each other, are dependent on each other. They are born out of each other, co-operate with each other, live together and also over power each other.

The Samkhya view rules out the possibility of Brahman being the cause of the world because Brahman is different in nature from the world. Brahman is homogeneous, pure and conseious; and so it cannot be the cause of the world which is heterogenous, impure and unconscious. Prakṛti or Pradhana, on the other hand, is capable of modifications, and as it consists of the three Gunas of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, it can very well be said to have caused pleasure, pain and indifference in the world. The effect cannot be different in nature from the cause; gold ornaments are the effects of gold and not of clods of earth. That is why, just as the ornaments can be resolved back into gold, the world and its objects also can get them selves resolved back into Prakṛti at the time of dissolution. The world as the manifest effect and Prakṛti as the unmanifest cause are both different in nature from Puruşa who is Nirguna, conscious and eternally the self-same subject. He can never be causally connected with Prakṛti; and in knowing this lies his salvation. Such in brief is the cosmological frame-work of the Samkhya school in which the entire evolution of the world takes place, through the various evo lutes such as Buddhi (intellect), Ahamkāra (ego principle), and the Tanmatras (subtle elements).

(b) Vaiseșika Atomism: Epigenesis.

If there have been any attempts among Indian philosophers to think of the universe and our experience as a whole, with the atti

THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM

tude of science and with an empirical bias, the earliest such attempt is that of the Vaisesikas. It is not only, as is generally conceded, the analysis of what is given in experience which they have made by means of the categories and the atomic theory; but they have also made an attempt to achieve by the same means a synthesis and a synoptic view of the universe, though it is in a naturalistic and materialistic fashion. The categories and the atoms seem to split the structure of the universe and the knowledge thereof into scat tered bits of stones and bricks, as it were, but the motives which the Vaiseşikas appear to have in the very discussion of the cate gories make us think that what the Vaišeşikas aimed at was the conception of the world as a systematic and harmonious whole, in cluding in it, or at least connected with it a moral order and a divine supervision. Notwithstanding this noble aim, their failure: to achieve it is dismal indeed.

According to the Vaišesika school, the creation or the coming info being of all physical objects is due to the combinations in dif ferent proportions of the four kinds of atoms or Paramanus. They are indivisible, partless, eternal and uncaused particles of earth, water, fire and air, differing qualitatively due to the four specific qualities of smell, taste, colour and touch. During the time of dissolution, they do not produce anything, but at the time of a new creation they come together on account of the force of the unseen merits and demerits of the actions of the souls, as also on account of the motion in the formation of a dyad or Dvyanuka, by bringing together two atoms. Both the dyad and the two atoms of which it is formed are invisible; and though the qualities of the cause are reproduced in the effect, for instance, the whiteness of the atoms is reproduced in the dyad, the original sphericity or parimandalya of the atoms is not reproduced. Instead there is the emergence of new dimensions, Anutva and Hrasvatva(Smallness and shortness) in the dyad. Similar ly, when three dyads combine to produce a Tryanuka tetrad the whiteness of the cause again is seen to be reproduced in the effect; but once again there is the emergence of new dimensions in the Tryanuka, viz., Mahatva and Dirghatva, i.e., largeness and length. Tryanuka is the first visible entity, and with that the atoms become able to combine themselves in new and ever new products without requiring any more the agency of God. In short, matter in the form of atoms which possess qualities of their own, the pull of the Adrsta, and a push only at the start by God, is all that the atomic theory of the Vaiseşikas wants in order to explain the origination of the several objects in the world and the emergence or epigenesis of new qualities in them.

VEDANTA THE CULMINATION OF INDIAN THOUGHT

The doctrine of epigenesis means literally the genesis or the origination (Arambha) of an altogether new effect on the des truction of the old, viz., the cause. Though the effect is connected with the cause, it is not implicitly present in it; it is a new beginning. So the theory of the Vaiseșikas is known as Arambhavada or Asat kāryavāda.

Now, the epigenesis of which the Vaiseșika system speaks takes different forms. There is first the epigenesis in atomism. The formation of a Dvyapuka out of two atoms, as said above, is an epigenetic product because the quality of whiteness, for instance, of the two combining atoms is produced in it, the Parimandalya or the sphericity of the atoms is not reproduced; instead there arise in it the new dimensions of Anutva and Hrasvatva. Similarly, the atomic formations which come into being after Dvyanukas on ac count of the combinations of the two or more Dvyanukas are not simple summations or arithmetical additions, but are geometrical progressions arrived at by the process of multiplication, so that every term excepting the first in that series is an epigenetic product on account of the emergence of new qualities in it.

Secondly, there occurs what we may call as the epigenesis in generation and destruction. The doctrine of momentary exist ence of the Buddhists is a hob-goblin to the Indian logicians, be cause it can explain neither generation nor destruction. Genera tion will require one moment, and destruction will require another moment; one moment alone will not suffice to account for both gene ration and destruction. Thus the Nyaya-Vaiseșika system holds that the jar comes into existence one moment after the Kapalas (pieces of the jar) are united; and this itself involves the emergence of the jar which was not there in the Kapalas. Similarly, they hold that the jar is destroyed one moment after the Kapalas are destroyed; a second and a novel destruction of the jar takes place after the first destruction of the Kapalas has taken place, and therefore there is an epigenetic destruction also.

The Indian logicians are not content with explaining generation and destruction only as occupying more than a moment's span and in showing that they are epigenetic in character. They say that every product, for instance, a pitcher, is a neutral entity at the moment of production, and that qualities like the red colour in the pitcher or the smell in the rose emerge in the second moment, and so are epigenetic in character. A substance being Nirguna (without qualities) at the start, on the Vaiseșika hypothesis, to call it Saguna or as endowed with qualities afterwards during the next moment

THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM

is possible only when the qualities that emerge are altogether new and are therefore epigenetic.

We have also the doctrine of epigenesis in the concept of the Asamavāyi-kāraṇa of the Indian logicians. They hold that in the case of cloth, the many Tantur pas g. the whitenesses of the there several threads produce a new whiteness of the cloth (pata) which is unique and suigeneris. As compared with the Tanturupas, fore, the Patarūpa is an epigenetic formation: the conjunction the of threads which inheres in the threads is the non-inherent or the Asamavayi cause of the cloth of which the threads are the material or the inherent cause. Therefore, though the cloth is inherent in its material or Samavayi cause, viz., the threads, the colour of the cloth is not inherent in the threads but is altogether a new (though apparently similar) product. In other words, the white colours of the threads which constitute an Asamavayi cause of the cloth produce in it, so to say, a new whiteness.

There is finally, what is known as epigenesis in knowledge. The Self, according to the Naiyyāyikas, is without knowledge during sleep. Later on, when a man wakes up, knowledge emerges, and is therefore epigenetic in character.

(c) The Flux in Early Buddhism; Later Schools.

One may say that there is neither metaphysics nor cosmology in early Buddhism inasmuch as Buddha himself was indifferent to the ultimate questions of philosophy on account of their having little or no bearing on the moral and spiritual life of man. Yet the theories of Nairātmya and Samghäta which are but the negative. and the positive sides of the phenomenalistic metaphysics, as also the theory of Santana or perpetual flux into which that of Samghata was transformed have been accepted by Buddha. The counter part of this, which is equally phenomenalistic, viz., the ethico-cosmo logical theory of the concatenations of twelve causes, known as the Pratitya-samutpăda, has also been the great discovery of Buddha. No doubt, he might have for sufficient reasons wished to banishi altogether the metaphysical and the cosmological speculations as useless jargon; but it is not simply the indifference and the conse quent stress on the spiritual destiny of man and the way to it out of misery that are responsible for the gradual growth of nihilism and scepticism in the subsequent Buddhist schools. For, the utter dis trust in knowledge of Madhyamika Buddhism, whether it refers to God, soul, immortality, substance or cause, the seed was already, though perhaps unknowingly, sown by Buddha himself. That seed consisted in going straight against the teachings of the Upanişads,

VEDANTA-THE CULMINATION OF INDIAN THOUGHT

in replacing first the conception of the static Being by the dynamic conception of becoming, and then in thinking that change itself apart from anything which changes, constitutes the reality, and that anything which does not change or is permanent, whether it is mind, matter or spirit, is nothing but an illusion.

To Buddha himself, as to Hume afterwards, matter and mind are mere labels for two different sets of aggregates; the former is made up of the four elements of earth, water, fire and air, or rather the sense data of hardness, fluidity, heat and pressure; and the latter is made up of the states of consciousness. Even at this stage, that is, when the external world is thought of as the Samghata or an aggregate of sensations, a sort of continuous but permanent existence can be attributed to it. But if the fact of being spatially contiguous itself is further reduced to a succession of chance-c ties which appear more as secondary than as primary, the cosmo logical problem will have as many solutions as there are chance variations in the momentary groupings and subjective inclinations. As a matter of fact, if there is Samghata, there can be no Santāna; and if there is Santana there can be no Samghäta. For there must occur some gap in the incessant flux in order to give some opportu nity for two or more things to come together and form aggregates. And if, on the other hand, the groupings must be formed even while the elements are in motion, there may occur chance-groupings on different occasions and not the same or uniform grouping as vouch safed by the law of dependent origination. Even when the condi tions are the same, we may not expect the same or the similar white flame; we may sometimes get yellow or blue. The solution of the cosmological problem on the premises of early Buddhism is not only useless but impossible. e-quali

Before we proceed to the consideration of the cosmological pro blem in the later Buddhistic schools, we may note in passing that the permanence denied by Buddha in cosmology and metaphysics was granted in the domain of spiritual knowledge. "There is an unborn, unoriginated, unmade, uncompounded; were there not, O monks, there would be no escape from the world of the born, originated, etc." (Udäna viii. 3). And in Majjhim Nikaya (I, 138) echoing as if, what Kṛṣṇa says about himself in the Bhagavad-Gita (III. 27), Buddha says, "I shall continue to be in the future, permanent, im mutable, eternal, of a nature that knows no change". If for the discerning eye of the Buddha, there remains something in the nature of 'T' which is immutable and permanent, the safest way of expres ing it was not to deny the conception of permanence as altogether illusory, but to say after the manner of the Upanişads, that the

THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM

knowledge of it can be had by revelation and not by reasoning or arguments. To create a philosophy utterly sceptical in character and to reserve the knowledge of the spirit or the real 'T' in another chamber for private consumption is not only to attempt to eat and save the bread at the same time, but to rob the world of the incentive for philosophical knowledge which, in the hands of a gifted few, may become the key to open the gates of Reality. As his declaration goes, Buddha himself had nothing to hide, and hist teachings were not a sealed book. As such, the choice for early Buddhism was either to build a philosophy which was consistent with Buddha's discovery of spiritual wisdom or to spread the latter without even unwittingly raising the sceptical dust which would make its vision dim and blind the vision of the followers.

This exactly was the fate of Buddhism in the later schools, the history of Buddhism being its own refutation. The conception of impermanence was changed into that of momentariness; causa tion became a mere succession; the Samghata changed into Santana, and the distinction between the universal and the particular was. further carried into a particular and its Sva-laksana, so that within the knowledge of a particular object, there was again an indeter minate knowledge which amounted to the assertion of its bare mo mentary existence or 'thisness'. It is this last which became the only perceptual eality for the Vaibhaşikas, all else being the super imposition of the mind and therefore unreal. Even this minimum of presentational reality was changed by the Sautrántikas into a mere possible or hypothetical reality, on the ground that what was reported as being perceived in a particular moment was nothing but the representation of what was perceived a moment before. The so-called perceived object therefore is not really perceived but in ferred; it is a perception which had occurred in the past and there fore might not be real now; it may be only possible or hypothetical. The Yogācāravādin or the subjective idealist cuts the bottom even of this hypothetically possible world by telling us that it is better to believe in our own dream-like mental images than in a doubtful world which may or may not exist. He wishes us to believe that the forms of objects of our knowledge are determined by our ideas and not given by the reality of the external world. In proof of this he says that just as our experience in dreams arises on account of prior impressions or Samskaras though there is no external world, even so our experience of the waking life may be independent of the external world. And now, one step further, and there is utter annihilation on all hands. The nihilism of the Súnyavādin or the Madhyamika has devoured in one sweep the knower, the known, the

VEDANTA THE CULMINATION OF INDIAN THOUGHT

knowledge, and the means of knowledge, as also the law of causation and the ideas of substance, God, freedom, immortality, Nirvana, and Buddha too!

All this compares well with a similar movement in Western philosophy. The presentative theory of knowledge in Descartes gave place to the re-presentative theory in Locke, which, in its turn, was substituted by that of mental states in Berkeley, and which ulti mately lost its significance in the unsubstantial and meaningless succession of momentary impressions in Hume. The natural result of this gradual decline and narrowing down of thought, so far as Buddhism is concerned was that while to the Vaibhäşikas, Samsāra and Nirvana were both real, to the Sautrántikas, even though Samsara is hypothetically real, Nirvana is unreal because there is no indication of an inferred Sva-laksana. We do not understand how a Sauträntika, and as a matter of that, a Madhyamika, all the more can claim to be Buddhists at all if Nirvana is unreal to them! To the subjective idealist the Samsara will naturally be unreal in the absence of the external world, though Nirvana, in the sense of consciousness, will be real to him. As the nihilist lays his axe at the very root of knowledge, there will hardly be any possibility of Samsara and Nirvana being real or unreal for him.

(d) Monad in Jainism: Substance and Qualities. The Jaina atomism is more consistent than that of the Vaiseşika, just as what Empedocles says about it is more consistent than what Democritus says. The Vaiseşikas like Democritus, say that atoms are qualitatively different; they take a physical view of the atoms. The Jainas, on the other hand, like Empedocles, say that all atoms. are qualitatively the same. There is no difference in kind; and so it may be said that they take a mathematical view of the atoms. According to Vaišeşikas, the earth-atoms differ from water-atoms, the water-atoms differ from fire-atoms, which in their turn differ from air-atoms. Each kind of atom has got a specific quality of its own, corresponding to the elements of which it is an atom. The Jainas push the inquiry into the nature of the atoms a step further and say that even the so-called original or primary and specific qualities of the four kinds of elements are due, like all other secon dary qualities, to the different combinations and mixing of atoms in different proportions. The Jainas have simplified the process in which the atoms mingle into each other and produce the cosmos with all its various objects. With atoms differing only in quantity and weight, and with motion introduced in them so as to form out of them different groupings of atoms in different proportions, the

THE COSMOLOGICAL PROBLEM

dream of the alchemist to transmute any metal into gold will not be chimerical according to the Jaina view of the nature of atoms. This naturalistic way of explaining the atomic structure of the uni verse by reference to the behaviour of the atoms will not only save the Jaina view from being committed to the arbitrary Nyaya-Vai sesika view of there being qualitative differences among atoms, but also save him from the necessity of bringing in God for the purpose of controlling and regulating the atomic formation of the universe, is stated for instance by Udayana in his Kusumanjali (v. 1) that God as an intelligent being is responsible for composing a binary compound out of the conjunction of two atoms. In Jainism the combination of atoms is explained as due to the humidity or dryness of the combining atoms, though they may express this by saying that integration and disintegration of atoms take place on account of mutual attraction and repulsion among atoms.

The atomic theory is also of great value to Jainism, inasmuch as it is vitally linked to the problem of substance and qualities in metaphysics, and to the theory of Karma in ethics and religion. Substances are mainly two, Jiva and Ajiva; and though the latter is further divided into five substances, viz., Kala, Dik, Dharma Adharma, and Pudgala, it is the last which is the most important of all in the present context. Pudgala is just another name for t matter; and matter consists of atoms which either pour in (Pud) or fall away (gal). So, Pudgala also means an atom. Bodies, sense-organs, and whatever is perceived by them, mind, actions, qualities such as, sound, union, fineness, grossness, shape, divi sion, darkness, etc. are included in Pudgala or matter. It is an eternal substance, and is indefinite with reference to quality and quantity. It may assume any form and develop any qualities; it may diminish or increase in volume without any addition or loss of particles. All things except space, time, souls are produced from it. Energy and motion can be introduced in it; and withal the atoms will either integrate or disintegrate, giving rise to new objects or destroying the old. Objects which are perceived come into being from gross matter, while actions, and the unperceivable results of them such as thoughts, inclinations, and tendencies of the mind, character, and sin and merit come into being from subtle matter.

Whatever may be the form of matter, whether gross or subtle, it is replete with Anus or Paramāņus. An atom is infinitesimal, eternal and ultimate; it is neither created nor destroyed; it is form less but is the basis of all objects which have form. Heavier atoms move downwards and lighter go upwards. Every atom occupies one point in space, and possesses taste, colour, smell and contact.

VEDANTA-THE CULMINATION OF INDIAN THOUGHT

In their subtle form, innumerable Paramānus occupy the space of gross atom A soul or a colony of souls is housed in an atom; and It is this at the same time, the soul is penetrated by the particles of subtle matter in the form of its ideas, thoughts and actions. subtle matter, the Karmasarira which the soul has formed that retards the original radiance of the soul.

Professor Jacobi has called Jainism as hylozoistic in character, because every material atom is ensouled. Matter here appears as alive or animated. In the opinion of some others, Jainism resembles the monadism of Leibnitz. To us it appears more as pan-psychism than hylozişm or monadism, because the soul about which Jainism speaks is more than life and less than spirit. In Leibnitz matter is a lower grade of spirit; in Jainism there is difference between matter, on the one hand, and life, soul, and spirit on the other, though, as a matter of fact, the very division of existence into Jiva and Ajiva goes against the system being called pan-psychism.

Another characteristic of the system as of the monadology of Leibnitz is the gradation of the Jivas not only from the viewpoint of biology and sense-knowledge, but also from the social and the spiritual points of view. From the minerals and plants at the bottom, to man at the top and with the intermediaries such as worms, ants, and bees there is a gradual development of sense knowledge which begins due to the possession of one sense, viz., touch, but develops at each stage with the addition of more senses and the knowledge due to it such as taste, smell, sight, and ends in man with hearing, i.e., with all the five kinds of knowledge. Then, there is what may be called the socio-spiritual gradation, either on account of the fourteen Guna-sthanas or the spiritual stages of the soul, or on account of the functions discharged by the Sadhus, the Adhyäpakas, Arhats, Tirthańkaras and Siddhas. So far as even the spiritual development is concerned, it must be noted that it is measured in terms of the fall and the decay of the Karmika Śarira or the subtle matter from the soul, so that, ultimately in the case of the Kevalin from whom all matter has fallen away there is direct, but suprasensuous knowledge of all things. Such a soul alone is endowed with infinite knowledge, infinite perception, infinite peace and infinite power. It is only at this highest stage of direct, un impeded, supra-sensuous perception of all things that Jainism exhi bits, we think, a third characteristic of monadism, viz., that the soul obtains the mirroring or representative capacity to know all.

It should also be noted that while in monadism there is the central monad, the monas monadum which serves the purpose of

God, in Jainism there is no God; and that while in the former there is nothing non-spiritual in nature, in the latter there is matter which is distinct and separate from the soul or the spirit. Naturally, as in the philosophy of Descartes, so here, in Jainism, there will be no genuine interaction between body and mind; no pre-established harmony between them, as is possible in Leibnitz through the central monad; and no parallelism also worth the name, as is possible in Spinoza on account of extension and thought being considered as two attributes of one and the same substance. Here, the body and soul come together by chance; and they are so opposed in nature, that as in Samkhya, one of them must fall away completely in order to bring about the salvation of the other.

(e) Criticism by Vedanta of Samkhya, Vaiseşika, Buddhism and Jainism.

(i) Samkhya.

Having acquainted ourselves with the cosmological accounts of Samkhya, Vaiseşika, Buddhism and Jainism we shall see how Vedanta criticises all of them. Coming to Samkhya, we are told in Kärikā 11, that Vyakta and Avyakta agree in having the fundamental characteristics of being Trigunātmika, non-discriminative, non sentient and changing. If this is so, what will be our special gain by being told in Kärikā 10, that the Avyakta is different from the Vyakta in non-fundamental points such as, being uncaused, eternal, omnipresent, one, independent and indivisible? There would have been substantial gain in being told that the Avyakta as cause is fundamentally different in nature from Vyakta, the effect; so that one could try to make his deliverance from the thraldom of the latter. On the contrary, our miserable condition of being bound by the meshes of the non-sentient and non-discriminative Gunas may become the permanent feature of our life by being told that the eternal nature of the omnipresent, one uncaused Prakrti also is non-discriminative and non-sentient. We can as well directly proceed from the Vyakta to the Jña, instead of going to Him through and after the discovery of the Avyakta or the Prakrti. The Avyakta, therefore, as said above, is superfluous category. The so-called proofs for the existence of Prakrti ought to prove as Šamkara says, a sentient, eternal, omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent and un caused God.

In his commentary on the Brahma-Sūtras (I.1.5-11) Samkara says that the non-sentient Pradhana cannot perform the act of 'seeing' which as the Chandogyopanişad (VI. 2 and 3) says was performed by the Brahman in order to become many and to pro

duce' The Samkhya need not cite the Bhagvadgita (XVII. 14) and say that because knowledge comes out of Sattva-guna, Pradhana, which has Sattva-guna in it, can be omniscient. For there will neces. sarily and always be the other two Gunas of Rajas and Tamas to prevent the Pradhana from being Sättvika. Again, there must first be a conscious subject in whom, later on, the Sattva may bring about omniscience; but the Pradhana is not a conscious subject. A Yogin becomes omniscient because he is already a conscious subject, and not because there is an excess of Sattva in him. The argument of the Samkhya will not be improved even if he says that Pradhana may derive the causal activity of 'seeing' from Brahman and so may be called the cause of the world, just as the iron ball which has, on account of its connection with fire, derived the power of burning, may be said to be the cause of burning other things. For, it will be more reasonable to say that Brahman is the cause of the world than saying that Pradhana which is dependent on Brahman is the cause of it, just as it is more reasonable to say that fire burns than to say that the ball of iron possessing the heat of fire burns.

If the non-intelligent Pradhana is the cause of the world, the Samkhya who admits the authority of Sruti will not be able to make out any sense of the passage (Taittiriya. II. 6): "The Brahman itself became divided into two portions, intelligent and non-intelligent'. meaning thereby the Jivas and the inanimate world. On the hypo thesis of non-intelligent Prakṛti as the cause, not only the coming into being of the Jivas is a mystery, but it also looks wonderful how the intelligent Buddhi could spring up. The Samkhya violates the law of Satkāryavāda, his vaunted doctrine of causality, and as a result, non-intelligence appears to be superior to intelligence. We have to go to an efficient, intelligent cause of the world, viz., the Purusa or the Brahman, even if we accept on Samkhya premises and for the sake of argument that Prakrti is the material cause of the world.

The Samkhya system comes into difficulties by first sundering, as if by a hatchet, intelligence from activity and then trying to bring them together artificially by a semblance of contact (Samyogabhāsa). viz., the close proximity of the two principles. It is correct in saying that Prakṛti is active, but wrong in supposing that the activity is inherent in Prakṛti. The so-called activity of Prakrti is centred only in the conscious Puruşa; it is seen to become manifest first in the evolutes of Prakṛti, and so is wrongly inferred by the Samkhya to be inherent in the unmanifest Prakrti. And then in order to explain the process of evolution the Samkhya conceives that the co

operation of the two takes place. But the proximity of the Puruşa being permanent, there would be no dissolution.

The Prakrti is neither absolute, nor independent, nor impersonal as the Samkhya school supposes it to be. The very dualistic concep tion involves limitations on the nature of Prakrti and of Purusa. Prakrti cannot alone be responsible for the evolution; it does re quire the proximity and guidance of Puruşa though he transcends the three Gunas. That it is subservient to Puruşa and is active for fulfilling his purposes of enjoyment and liberation shows that it is not absolute.

The transition from Puruşa to Mahat or Buddhi is more reason able and believable than the transition from Prakṛti to Mahat, if the Satkāryavāda is to be relied upon, and if, as the Samkhya says, the cause should be of the same nature as that of the effect. In the building up of mind and matter, of the intelligent and non-intelligent principles in its scheme of evolution, the Samkhya has neither been successful in identifying the two, nor in showing a close parallelism between them, or even between the cosmic and the psychic principles, viz., the Mahat and the Buddhi. If Buddhi acts as the first instru ment of contact between the Puruşa and the Prakṛti, how can it be the off-spring of Prakṛti? And if it is the first off-spring, how can it be the instrument of contact of Puruşa with the creation of Pra krti as the 37th Kärikä wants us to believe, and still be intelligent or non-intelligent as is convenient for the system to believe?

Ahamkāra also as the off-spring of Mahat appears to be a super fluous category; for, as the Karikā 24th defines it, it is the ego-sense, the Abhimana, in the form of 'T' (Aham) and is already involved in the awareness of himself which the Puruşa has while he is looking at his own reflection and the reflection of the entire objects of the universe in the mirror of Buddhi.

The treatment of the Tanmatras is arbitrary and involves con tradiction. The eleven Indriyas, namely, the five organs of know ledge, the five organs of action and mind are said to be born out of Sättvika Ahamkāra, because they possess the power of knowing or of acting or of thinking. But the Tanmatras inspite of their being the essences which endure and which reappear as qualities of the five gross elements and which become the objects of know ledge are said to arise paradoxically enough out of Tamasa Aham kāra (Kärikā 25). In Samkhya, the functions are prior to structures. as the essences of the elements are posited first. Further, the es sences come out of the Tamasa Ahamkāra, but the elements which come out of the essences exhibit qualities of Sättvika, Rajasa and

Tāmasa Gunas respectively (Kärikä 38). If we are to say in the Aristotelian fashion that the essences are the first to exist but the last to be known, then in the Samkhya treatment of the Tanmatras we are having a mixture of idealism and naturalism.

Equally unsatisfactory is the position assigned to Manas. It forms a part of the Antahkarana; but we are not sure whether this inner sense itself consists of two parts, or of three parts or of four, or of five parts, one of which is, of course, Manas. It is just possible that it consists of two parts only, viz., Buddhi and Manas; it may consist of three, with Ahamkāra added on to the first two (Karikā 29); or as the Kärikä 30 tells us, it may consist of four parts, viz., the three mentioned above, along with Manas coupled with a sense organ, and lastly, if Manas is coupled with an organ of action then with this and the four mentioned above, it may consist of five parts. Whether it is the triple internal organ or the four-fold one, the treatment given by the Karikas is not accurate from the psycho logical point of view. Further, if Manas is a part of the internal organ like Buddhi and Ahamkāra, it must be on a par with them, and so cannot be their off-spring. Again, while Budddhi and Aham kāra are products as well as productive, the Manas is only a product. Moreover, Manas partakes both of intelligence and activity; it shares equally the nature of both the Jñanendriyas and the Karmendriyas, which therefore are said to function properly only when the Manas attends (Kärikä 27). Hence, in a way, it is superior both to Prakrti and Puruşa, inasmuch as intelligence and activity are being made compatible with each other in Manas.

Coming to the relation of Prakṛti to Guņas we must note in the first place that the relation is left undetermined. We are not sure which of them is prior. If Prakrti is one and indivisible (Avibhāga) cosmic substance, it cannot be spoken of as a composite of three Gunas, even supposing that the latter have adjectival value only. For, even as adjectives, the Gunas betray that there is plurality lurking in the unitary nature of Prakṛti. And if the Gunas are considered as substantives, they are definitely supernumerary in view of the unity of Prakṛti. To put it differently, to treat the Gunas as adjectival in character and to say that Prakrti is Trigunat mikā is to evaporate the substantival nature of Prakrti. There will be then only adjectives without there being any substance for being qualified by them. On the other hand, to treat the Gumas as sub stantival in character is to rob the unitary nature of Prakrti and establish plurality instead. From another point of view the rela tion of Prakṛti to Gunas can neither be said to be on the analogy of an aggregate or a whole of parts. For in the former case, it

does not much matter if the things which go to form an aggregate are increased or decreased to some extent at least; the heap remains a heap. So, if the Gunas are increased or decreased in number, Prakrti would remain the same. This means that Prakrti is more real than the Gunas. In the latter case, that is, if the Prakrti is considered as a whole of parts, the parts or the Guņas would be more real than the whole, viz., the Prakrti. For there cannot be a whole without the parts. To avoid these difficulties, if it be said that Prakrti is an organic unity of which the Gunas are mere members, we shall no doubt endow reality on both of them, but shall still inconsistently make the members more responsible than the whole. The Gunas will appear to possess their own indivi duality, whereas Prakrti will appear to be an abstraction or at best an impersonal entity as accepted by the system. As a matter of fact, Karikā 12 will give support to this view. The reciprocal genera tion of the Guņas, their conquest of each other, and their co-opera tion vouch for their own individuality and functions. But this means that we are accepting once again the reality of the trinity of the Gunas more readily than that of the Prakṛti in which they are said to be implicitly present. In order avoid this difficulty also, it may be finally said that Prakrti is nothing else but the equipoised condition (Samyavastha) of the three Gunas. But here again the doubt can be raised whether the Gunas are at complete rest, or they are yet dynamic. Looking to the nature of Prakrti, viz., that it is perpetually active, we cannot, at any stage of the evolution of the Gunas deprive them also of their inherent motion. The so-called Samyavastha of the Guņas is at best only a state of tension. What is called Prakṛti becomes then nothing but a name for the Sakti (power) which is latent in the three Gunas. But to think in this way is to give not only priority and the sole existence to the Gunas over Prakṛti, but also to deny to Prakrti as having an independent existence of its own. In short, the fundamental problem of the relation between Prakrti and the Gunas remains unsolved. The Vyakta and Avyakta, that is, the Gunas as manifested in the world and Prakrti, which is their unmanifest form so run into each other that the Avyakta almost vanishes into the Vyakta. For the Samkhya, then, instead of there being three terms to be known in succession (Kärikā 2), viz., the Vyakta, the Avyakta, and the Jña there remain only two, viz., the Vyakta and the Jña. Not that the Vyakta and the Avyakta are to be bracketed and known in advance before the Jña or the Jiva is known, but that the Avyakta or Prakrti being subsumed under the Vyakta or the Gunas, what re mains to be known excepting the Vyakta or the manifest world
