68- Shri V. S. Page

Chairman, The Maharashtra State Khadi and Village Industries Board

“I had attended a ceremony at Sangli in Ganpati Mandir when Gurudev and Dr. Radhakrishnan were present. Thereafter, somehow, I was called to Mal bungalow, a palace of the Rajasaheb of Sangli, by Shri Gurudev. I was specially called at 3PM to place my views before him regarding Vedanta philosophy, as given by Nischaldas, in his book ‘Vicharsagar’.  Accordingly, I went there. I found that Shri Gurudev was closeted in a room and was deeply immersed in writing something. The devotees sitting outside the room told me that nothing could be sure about his coming out though he had called me at 3PM. However, exactly at 3PM Shri Gurudev came out. The pose in which I saw him was rather startling. I was amazed at his mannerism. He held a pick-dani, a utensil for spitting, in his right hand. Under his left arm-pit there was a bundle of shirts. Perhaps, he wanted to change shirts within a short span of time. He wore dhoti in a loose fashion. As soon as he came out, he asked me, “Are you Mr. Page?”  I said, “Yes, I am Page.” A thought crossed my mind as I was looking at him. I thought: Is this a learned man whose manners seem to be quite eccentric, if not anything else? He started going out along with me to the main hall in the palace. As soon as the thought mentioned above crossed my mind, he looked at me, almost stared at me, and asked me a question, “Have you read ‘Contemporary philosophers’, a Govt. of India publication?” I said, “No, I have not read it.” He said, “Read it.” I asked, “What I am supposed to read in it; what in particular?” Shri Gurudev said, “I have written an article in it. Do read that article, you will find answers to your questions.” Then I was silent.

I need not tell what happened thereafter. We went in the main hall. I gave a brief talk. Shri Gurudev was very much pleased to hear me and he encouraged me by words of blessings. He told me that exposition of Vedanta doctrines, as I gave, was very correct and he was pleased with my talk. Thereafter I returned home. I read his article. There I found the explanation of his mannerism. In short, the reason for his behaviour is given by Dnyaneshwar in his commentary on Geeta, briefly, “वेडिवे माजी दडे महिमे भेणे”. Though Shri Gurudev behaved like an ordinary man in this world, his every action was purposeful, and the purpose was purely spiritual one. Without a shred of doubt, he read the thought in my mind and gave proper answer to me. This is not possible for an ordinary Yogi. It is only those, who have identified themselves with universal consciousness, who can read correctly the minds of others and give proper answers. It has left an indelible impression on my mind of the grandeur of Shri Gurudev’s spiritual height.”84

84- ACPR: Pathway to God, Vol. 7, No. 2 (1973) Pg. 31
